Title: François Rappo

----

Author: PM

----

Published: 03—15

----

Intro: ##—lives and works on the shore of lake Geneva. Graphic designer and typographer, he is Head of the Master in Art Direction at ECAL / University of Art & Design Lausanne.

----

text:

<span class="initials">PM</span>The Swiss Style has become known the world over for its precision. How did it acquire this reputation?

<span class="initials">FR</span>During the Second World War, Switzerland benefited from its position as a protected island, an island which pursued modernism, while the rest of Europe crumbled. It was this that allowed it to build a culture of advanced techniques and superior know-how. Typographers fleeing their own lands sought refuge here to continue their research, to such an extent that by 1945, the Swiss graphics industry was much further advanced than that of its neighbors. The same thing had already happened before in the 16th century, when Protestant Geneva welcomed master typographers such as (link: # text:Robert Estienne). In both instances, the political situation in the rest of Europe led to a concentration of skills in Switzerland.

What was so special about the Swiss Style?

Whereas in the neighboring countries the graphics culture was mainly focused around books, the Swiss made a great deal of effort to carry it over into other areas, most notably into industry and the arts. Multi-talented individuals, such as Max Bill, Richard Paul Lohse and others, created mutually beneficial links between graphic design, art, architecture, lighting and furniture design, etc. At the same time, associations such as the Werkbund (association of craftsmen) were set up always with the objective of promoting quality. It’s thanks to both of these phenomena that Swiss Style acquired such a strong identity.

What about public institutions?

They also put a lot of effort into signage, like the Swiss Federal Railways, who employed Josef Müller-Brockmann to develop their visual communication. Switzerland was able to spend a great deal of money on perfecting designs, with the result that in our visual environment today there is a graphic coherence that few other countries in the world enjoy. This know-how has been internalized by companies; for example, when the Swiss supermarket chain Coop revised their logo in 2001, they changed everything within two weeks!

Is the Modernist tradition linked primarily to the Swiss-German culture?

Halfway through the 20th century, the French-speaking Swiss designers were developing a more art-based craft, which created a division in the Werkbund. The German-speaking Swiss, however, concentrated their efforts on modernism. They trained in specialist schools, where strong personalities such as Johannes Itten ensured that the know-how was passed on. For example, Professor Hans Finsler played a fundamental role in Zurich by integrating photography into the study of graphic arts. With Emil Ruder, the Schule für Gestaltung Basel (Basel School of Design) developed highly advanced teaching methods. All of this was highly organized, and it was only in the 1960’s that French-speaking Switzerland came on the scene, principally after the National Exhibition in 1964. (image: 02.jpg)

Was it a homogeneous graphic design landscape?

No, it was frequently beset by controversy. The most spectacular saw Max Bill pitted against Jan Tschichold. Bill favored a modern, generalist approach to design, while Tschichold, who was more closely connected to the publishing world, had returned to a more classical model. These two characters battled it out through vicious articles which appeared in specialist revues. Their debate has enriched the typographic culture of this country, because it has forced professional designers to take a stance and to come up with new fusions of ideas.
